modules: openthread: Introduce psa_key_allocator. (#20852)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: doc/nrf/protocols/thread/overview/security.rst

.. _ug_ot_thread_security:

OpenThread Security
###################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

This section describes the security features of the |NCS| OpenThread implementation.
By default, the OpenThread stack uses the :ref:`nrf_security` (nrf_security) and `Platform Security Architecture (PSA)`_ for cryptographic operations.

Nordic OpenThread samples leverage :ref:`security` features supported in the |NCS| that can be divided into four major categories:

* Secure processing environment
* Cryptography
* Secure storage
* Platform Security Support

In the following sections you will learn more details about each listed category.

Secure processing environment
*****************************

Depending on the board, Thread samples can use a secure processing environment.

nRF54L with Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M)
=====================================

> On the nRF54L SoC, Thread samples support :ref:`app_boards_spe_nspe` with Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the nRF54L15 SoC, Thread samples support :ref:`app_boards_spe_nspe` with Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M).
```
if it's just MLT (?), if not we should probably say nRF54L Series devices.

Author: Currently, it is only for L15.

Reviewer: got it, then the suggestion applies :)

All cryptographic operations within the Thread stack are performed by utilizing the `Platform Security Architecture (PSA)`_ API and executed in the secure TF-M environment.
The secure materials like Thread network key are stored in the TF-M secure storage using the :ref:`tfm_encrypted_its` module.

To build a Thread sample with the TF-M support, :ref:`build <building>` for the :ref:`board target <app_boards_names>` with the ``/ns`` variant.

> For example to build the Thread CLI sample for the nRF54L15DK board with the TF-M support, use the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, to build the Thread CLI sample for the nRF54L15 DK with the TF-M support, run the following command:
```

.. code-block:: console

   west build -p -b nrf54l15dk/nrf54l15/cpuapp/ns samples/openthread/cli

Cryptography
************

The Thread stack uses the PSA Cryptography API for cryptographic operations integrated in the :ref:`nrf_security` library.
This library offers various configuration possibilities and backends that can be employed to implement :ref:`cryptographic operations <security_index>`.

The Thread stack requires the following cryptographic operations:

* True Random Number Generation (TRNG)
* HMAC-SHA-256
* AES-128-CCM
* AES-CMAC-128
* ECDSA-SHA-256
* HKDF-SHA-256
* PBKDF2-SHA-256
* TLS-ECJPAKE (TSL 1.2)

Secure storage
**************

The Thread stack uses the PSA Crypto API for key management.
Depending on the platform and configuration, you can use PSA Internal Trusted Storage or CRACEN Key Management Unit (KMU) for storing the Thread cryptographic materials in non-volatile memory.

By default, the Thread stack uses PSA ITS backend for storing the Thread cryptographic materials.

> It is chosen by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_PSA_NVM_BACKEND_ITS` Kconfig option to ``y``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can enable it by setting the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_PSA_NVM_BACKEND_ITS` Kconfig option to ``y``.
```

To store the Thread cryptographic materials in the CRACEN KMU on the supported platforms, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_PSA_NVM_BACKEND_KMU` Kconfig option to ``y``.

PSA Internal Trusted Storage
============================

> The PSA Internal Trusted Storage (ITS) is an encrypted storage within the Zephyr Setting or dedicated partition that can be used to store the Thread cryptographic materials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PSA Internal Trusted Storage (ITS) is an encrypted storage within the Zephyr settings or dedicated partition that you can use to store the Thread cryptographic materials.
```

> It is accelerated by the hardware-accelerated by the nRF crypto driers such as CryptoCell or CRACEN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is accelerated by the hardware through nRF crypto drivers such as CryptoCell or CRACEN.
```

Thread stack uses PSA ITS range defined by the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_PSA_ITS_NVM_OFFSET` Kconfig option, and by default it is set to ``0x20000``.
The maximum number of keys that can be stored in the PSA ITS is defined in the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_PSA_ITS_NVM_MAX_KEYS` Kconfig option, and by default it is set to ``20``.

.. _ug_ot_thread_security_kmu:

> CRACEN Key Management Unit (KMU)
> ================================

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CRACEN Key Management Unit
==========================
```

CRACEN Key Management Unit (KMU) is a hardware-based key storage solution that can be used to store the Thread cryptographic materials.

> It is available on the nRF54L series SoCs, and Development Kits such as nRF54L15DK, nRF54L10DK, and nRF54L05DK.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is available on the nRF54L Series devices. 
```

It allows storing cryptographic materials in the non-volatile memory and provides a secure way to access them.
To learn more about the CRACEN Key Management Unit (KMU) and its usage, see :ref:`ug_nrf54l_crypto_kmu_cracen_peripherals`.

In this solution, the keys are stored within the available slots in the :ref:`ug_nrf54l_crypto_kmu_slots` range that are not reserved for current and future |NCS| use cases.
The default slots range used for Thread is from ``80`` to ``99``.

> To change the slots start number, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_KMU_SLOT_START` Kconfig option to the desired start slot number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To change the starting slot number, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_KMU_SLOT_START` Kconfig option to the desired slot.
```

The end slot number is calculated as a sum of the start slot number and the maximum number of keys that can be stored in the PSA ITS defined in the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_PSA_ITS_NVM_MAX_KEYS` Kconfig option.
The Raw usage scheme defined in the :ref:`ug_nrf54l_crypto_kmu_key_usage_schemes` section is used for all Thread keys.

Key management
==============

> In the Thread stack there are the following cryptographic materials to be stored in the non-volatile memory:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the Thread stack, the following cryptographic materials are stored in the non-volatile memory:
```

.. list-table:: Thread cryptographic materials
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Crypto material
     - Description
     - Persistence
     - Key type and algorithm
     - Key size
     - Amount
     - Number of KMU slots needed for a key [1]_
   * - Network key

>      - OpenThread Network Master Key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - An OpenThread network master key.
```

     - Persisted
     - Asymmetric HMAC, HMAC-SHA-256
     - 128 bits
     - 3 (new, active, pending)
     - 1
   * - PSKc

>      - Pre-shared key for the Thread network for the commissioner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - A pre-shared key for the Thread network for the commissioner.
```

       The key is derived based on the Commissioning Credential and used as a passphrase input to PAKE cipher suite to establish the shared secret.
     - Persisted
     - Symmetric AES, AES-128-CCM
     - 128 bits
     - 3 (new, active, pending)
     - 1
   * - Service Registration Protocol (SRP) ECC keypair

>      - An ECC keypair used for Verification and Signing messages between the SRP client and server

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - An ECC keypair used for Verification and Signing messages between the SRP client and server.
```

     - Persisted
     - Asymmetric ECC secp256r1 key pair, ECDSA-SHA-256
     - 256 bits
     - 1
     - 2
   * - Message Authentication Code (MAC) key

>      - A key passed to the MAC layer to protect 802.15.4 data frames, derived from Network key using HKDF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - A key passed to the MAC layer to protect 802.15.4 data frames, derived from Network key using HKDF.
```

     - Volatile
     - Symmetric, HKDF-SHA-256
     - 128 bits
     - 1
     - N/A
   * - Mesh Link Establishment (MLE) key

>      - A key used for the Mesh Link Establishment (MLE) protocol, derived from Network key using HKDF

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - A key used for the Mesh Link Establishment (MLE) protocol, derived from Network key using HKDF.
```

     - Volatile
     - Symmetric, HKDF-SHA-256
     - 128 bits
     - 1
     - N/A
   * - PSKd

>      - Pre-shared key for the Thread network for the device

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - A pre-shared key for the Thread network for the device.
```

     - Volatile
     - Asymmetric ECC secp256r1 key pair, ECDSA-SHA-256
     - 256 bits
     - 2
     - N/A
   * - Commissioning Credential

>      - Human readable commissioning credential used to form the PSKc key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - A human-readable commissioning credential used to form the PSKc key.
```

     - Volatile
     - Password
     - 8-255 bytes
     - 1
     - N/A
   * - Key Establishment Key (KEK)
     - A key used to secure delivery of the network-wide key and other network parameters to the Joiner.
     - Volatile
     - Symmetric, HKDF-SHA-256
     - 128 bits
     - 1
     - N/A

.. [1] The KMU slots number is applicable only for the CRACEN KMU backend.

> Platform Security Support
> *************************
> The following table summarizes the current security configuration and features supported for Thread-enabled hardware platforms in the |NCS|.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Platform security support
*************************

The following table summarizes the current security configuration and features supported for Thread-enabled hardware platforms in the |NCS|.
```

> This is a reference configuration that can be modified in the production firmware by using proper Kconfig settings or implementing custom cryptographic backends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a reference configuration that you can modify in the production firmware by using proper Kconfig settings or implementing custom cryptographic backends.
```

.. list-table:: Thread platforms security support
   :widths: auto
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Platform
     - Networking backend
     - Cryptography backend
     - ARM TrustZone support
     - PSA Secure Storage backend
   * - nRF52840 SoC
     - Thread
     - Oberon + CryptoCell [2]_
     - No
     - Trusted Storage library + SHA-256 hash
   * - nRF5340 SoC
     - Thread
     - Oberon + CryptoCell [2]_
     - Yes
     - Trusted Storage library + Hardware Unique Key (HUK)
   * - nRF54L15, nRF54L10, nRF54L05 SoCs
     - Thread
     - CRACEN [3]_
     - Yes
     - Trusted Storage library + Hardware Unique Key (HUK) + Key Management Unit (KMU)
   * - nRF54L15, nRF54L10, nRF54L05 SoCs + Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M)
     - Thread
     - CRACEN
     - Yes
     - Trusted Firmware-M (TF-M) + Key Management Unit (KMU)

.. [2] The CryptoCell backend is used in parallel with the Oberon backend.

>        By default, the CryptoCell backend is used only for Random Number Generation (RNG) and the AEAD key derivation driver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       By default, the CryptoCell backend is used only for the Random Number Generation (RNG) and AEAD key derivation driver.
```

>        To enable the CryptoCell backend for additional operations, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_CRYPTO_DRIVER_CC3XX` Kconfig option to true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       To enable the CryptoCell backend for additional operations, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_PSA_CRYPTO_DRIVER_CC3XX` Kconfig option to ``true``.
```

.. _ug_ot_thread_security:

OpenThread security
###################

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 2

This section describes the security features of the |NCS| OpenThread implementation.

> By default, the OpenThread stack uses the :ref:`nrf_security` (nrf_security) and `Platform Security Architecture (PSA)`_ for cryptographic operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the OpenThread stack uses the :ref:`nrf_security` and `Platform Security Architecture (PSA)`_ for cryptographic operations.
```

Nordic OpenThread samples leverage :ref:`security` features supported in the |NCS| that can be divided into four major categories:

* Secure processing environment
* Cryptography
* Secure storage
* Platform Security Support

> In the following sections you will learn more details about each listed category.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details, see the following sections.
```

The maximum number of keys that can be stored in the PSA ITS is defined in the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_PSA_ITS_NVM_MAX_KEYS` Kconfig option, and by default it is set to ``20``.

.. _ug_ot_thread_security_kmu:

CRACEN Key Management Unit
==========================

CRACEN Key Management Unit (KMU) is a hardware-based key storage solution that can be used to store the Thread cryptographic materials.
It is available on the nRF54L Series devices.
It allows storing cryptographic materials in the non-volatile memory and provides a secure way to access them.
To learn more about the CRACEN Key Management Unit (KMU) and its usage, see :ref:`ug_nrf54l_crypto_kmu_cracen_peripherals`.

In this solution, the keys are stored within the available slots in the :ref:`ug_nrf54l_crypto_kmu_slots` range that are not reserved for current and future |NCS| use cases.
The default slots range used for Thread is from ``80`` to ``99``.
To change the starting slot number, set the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_KMU_SLOT_START` Kconfig option to the desired slot.

> The end slot number is calculated as a sum of the start slot number and the maximum number of keys that can be stored in the PSA ITS defined in the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_PSA_ITS_NVM_MAX_KEYS` Kconfig option.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The end slot number is calculated as a sum of the starting slot number and the maximum number of keys that can be stored in the PSA ITS defined in the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_OPENTHREAD_PSA_ITS_NVM_MAX_KEYS` Kconfig option.
```
